docs: Document the Session API (#313)
serverpod/serverpod_docs: docs/06-concepts/05-sessions.md

# Sessions

A Session in Serverpod is a request-scoped context object that exists for the duration of a single client request or connection. It provides access to server resources and maintains state during request processing.

Sessions are the gateway to Serverpod's functionality - every interaction with the database, cache, file storage, or messaging system happens through a session. The framework automatically creates the appropriate session type when a client makes a request, manages its lifecycle, and ensures proper cleanup when the request completes. For special cases like background tasks or system operations, you can also create and manage sessions manually.

:::note

A Serverpod Session should not be confused with the concept of "web sessions" or "user sessions" which persist over multiple API calls. See the [Authentication documentation](./11-authentication/01-setup.md) for managing persistent authentication.

:::

## Quick reference

> ### Essential properties

Reviewer: Suggestion: Missing authentication info, that is a major component of the session that should be covered somewhere.

- **`db`** - Database access. [See database docs](./06-database/01-connection.md)
- **`caches`** - Local and distributed caching. [See caching docs](./08-caching.md)
- **`storage`** - File storage operations. [See file uploads](./12-file-uploads.md)

> - **`messages`** - Server events for real-time communication. [See server events docs](./16-server-events.md)

Reviewer: To use the same language as the Server events documentation and make it clera that it is used both within and across multiple servers.

```suggestion
- **`messages`** - Server events for real-time communication within and across servers. [See server events docs](./16-server-events.md)
```

- **`passwords`** - Credentials from config and environment. [See configuration](./07-configuration.md)

### Key methods

- **`log(message, level)`** - Add log entry

> - **`close(error, stackTrace)`** - Manual session cleanup

Reviewer: Suggestion: Remove, this is only used in an advanced use-case and should not be used in the general case.

- **`addWillCloseListener(callback)`** - Register cleanup callback

## Session types

Serverpod creates different session types based on the context:

| Type | Created For | Lifetime | Common Use Cases |
|------|-------------|----------|------------------|
| **MethodCallSession** | `Future<T>` endpoint methods | Single request | API calls, CRUD operations |
| **WebCallSession** | Web server routes | Single request | Web pages, form submissions |
| **MethodStreamSession** | `Stream<T>` endpoint methods | Stream duration | Real-time updates, chat |
| **StreamingSession** | WebSocket connections | Connection duration | Live dashboards, multiplayer |
| **FutureCallSession** | Scheduled tasks | Task execution | Email sending, batch jobs |
| **InternalSession** | Manual creation | Until closed | Background work, migrations |

### Example: Automatic session (MethodCallSession)

```dart

> Future<String> hello(Session session, String name) async {

Reviewer: Suggestion: Include the endpoint definition in the example, otherwise it is not clear that this is an endpoint.

  // MethodCallSession is created automatically
  return 'Hello $name';
  // Session closes automatically when method returns
}
```

### Example: Manual session (InternalSession)

InternalSession is the only session type that requires manual management:

```dart
Future<void> performMaintenance() async {
  var session = await Serverpod.instance.createSession();
  try {
    // Perform operations
    await cleanupOldRecords(session);
    await updateStatistics(session);
  } finally {
    await session.close(); // Must close manually!
  }
}
```

**Important**: Always use try-finally with InternalSession to prevent memory leaks.

> ## Session lifecycle

Reviewer: Suggestion: Missing documentation for `addWillCloseListener`. Please add documentation for this under this section.

```mermaid
flowchart TB

>     Request([Client Request]) --> Create[Session Created]

Reviewer: Suggestion: This step could also be a future call that is triggered. Documentation should reflect that, could we use a more general term instead of client request?

Since you mention `Execute Endpoint Method`, perhaps we should make it clear that we are describing an endpoint method?

    Create --> Init[Initialize]
    Init --> Active[Execute Endpoint Method]
    Active --> Close[Close Session]
    Close --> End([Request Complete])
```

Sessions follow a predictable lifecycle from creation to cleanup. When a client makes a request, Serverpod automatically creates the appropriate session type (see table above), initializes it with a unique ID, and sets up access to resources like the database, cache, and file storage. The only exception is `InternalSession`, which you create manually for background tasks.

During the active phase, your endpoint method executes with full access to Serverpod resources through the session. You can query the database, write logs, send messages, and access storage - all operations are tracked and tied to this specific session. When the method completes, most sessions close automatically, writing any accumulated logs to the database and releasing all resources.

> Manual sessions (`InternalSession`) require explicit closure with `session.close()`. Forgetting to close these sessions causes memory leaks as logs accumulate indefinitely. Always use try-finally blocks to ensure proper cleanup. After any session closes, attempting to use it throws a `StateError`.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Break this out to a separate header, under `Session lifecycle`, and include the part in the first paragraph as 

Perhaps you could use `Internal Sessions` as the title?

## Logging

> Serverpod batches log entries for performance. During normal operations, logs accumulate in memory and are written to the database in a single batch when the session closes. This includes all your `session.log()` calls, database query timings, and session metadata. The exception is streaming sessions, which write logs continuously by default to avoid memory buildup during long connections. **Warning**: If you forget to close a manual session (`InternalSession`), logs remain in memory indefinitely and are never persisted - this is a common cause of both memory leaks and missing debug information.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Transform the `warning` into a warning box.

> Serverpod batches log entries for performance. During normal operations, logs accumulate in memory and are written to the database in a single batch when the session closes. This includes all your `session.log()` calls, database query timings, and session metadata. The exception is streaming sessions, which write logs continuously by default to avoid memory buildup during long connections. **Warning**: If you forget to close a manual session (`InternalSession`), logs remain in memory indefinitely and are never persisted - this is a common cause of both memory leaks and missing debug information.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Mention the specific sessions that write logs continuously by type. `MethodStreamSession` and `StreamingSession`.

  var newSession = await Serverpod.instance.createSession();
  try {
    return await User.db.find(newSession, ...);
  } finally {
    await newSession.close();
  }
}
```

### 2. Use FutureCalls for delayed operations

Instead of managing sessions for async work, use Serverpod's future call system:

```dart
// ✅ Good - Let Serverpod manage the session
await serverpod.futureCallWithDelay(
  'processPayment',
  PaymentData(orderId: order.id),
  Duration(hours: 1),
);

// ❌ Complex - Manual session management
Future.delayed(Duration(hours: 1), () async {
  var session = await Serverpod.instance.createSession();
  try {
    await processPayment(session, order.id);
  } finally {
    await session.close();
  }
});
```

### 3. Handle errors properly

Always handle exceptions to prevent unclosed sessions:

```dart
// ✅ Good - Errors won't prevent session cleanup
Future<void> safeOperation() async {
  var session = await Serverpod.instance.createSession();
  try {
    await riskyOperation(session);
  } catch (e) {
    session.log('Operation failed: $e', level: LogLevel.error);
    // Handle error appropriately
  } finally {
    await session.close();
  }
}
```

## Testing

> When testing endpoints, you need a way to create valid sessions without going through the full HTTP request cycle. The `TestSessionBuilder` provides a controlled environment for integration tests:

Reviewer: And update the example so that a we switch out some form of property for the user, for example

```
var authenticatedSessionBuilder = sessionBuilder.copyWith(
      authentication:
          AuthenticationOverride.authenticationInfo(userId, {Scope('user')}),
    );
```

```suggestion
When testing endpoints, the `TestSessionBuilder` can be used to simulate and configure session properties for controlled test scenarios:
```

# Sessions

The `Session` object is the central context for server operations in Serverpod. It provides access to the database, caching, authentication, file storage, messaging, and request information during method calls and streaming connections.

## Core properties

Every `Session` provides access to these essential properties:

- **`db`**: Database access for queries and transactions
- **`caches`**: Access to local and distributed caches
- **`storage`**: Cloud storage operations for files
- **`messages`**: Real-time messaging between sessions
- **`passwords`**: Passwords loaded from `config/passwords.yaml`
- **`server`**: The Server instance that created this session

> - **`serverpod`**: Access to the Serverpod singleton via `server.serverpod`

Author: Both point to the same object. `_innerInitializeServerpod` set's the static `_instance` to `this`

> - **`serverpod`**: Access to the Serverpod singleton via `server.serverpod`

Reviewer 2: Honestly, I don't think we should expose `serverpod` or `server` on the session, that is a different question though.  But not sure if it makes sense to document it? Maybe?

Sessions provide built-in authentication support:

```dart
// Check if a user is signed in
bool isSignedIn = await session.isUserSignedIn;

// Get authentication information
AuthenticationInfo? authInfo = await session.authenticated;
if (authInfo != null) {
  int userId = authInfo.userId;
  Set<Scope> scopes = authInfo.scopes;
}

// Update authentication (typically handled by auth modules)
session.updateAuthenticated(authInfo);
```

For authentication features like user management and auth providers, see the [Authentication documentation](./11-authentication/01-setup.md).

## Session types

Serverpod creates different session types based on the context:

### MethodCallSession

Created for endpoint method calls. Provides access to HTTP request data:

```dart
if (session is MethodCallSession) {
  Uri uri = session.uri;
  String body = session.body;
  Map<String, dynamic> queryParams = session.queryParameters;
  Request httpRequest = session.request;
  
  // Access client information
  String remoteInfo = session.remoteInfo ?? 'unknown';
}
```

### StreamingSession

Created for WebSocket connections. Allows dynamic endpoint updates:

```dart
if (session is StreamingSession) {

>   session.updateAuthenticationKey(newKey);

Reviewer 2: Indeed and StreamingSession is the old streaming interface that is deprecated.

}
```

### MethodStreamSession

Created for streaming endpoint connections with a unique connection ID:

```dart
if (session is MethodStreamSession) {
  UuidValue connectionId = session.connectionId;
}
```

### FutureCallSession

Created when executing scheduled future calls:

```dart
if (session is FutureCallSession) {
  String futureCallName = session.futureCallName;
}
```

### WebCallSession

Created for web server requests when handling custom web routes:

```dart
if (session is WebCallSession) {
  // Handle web-specific operations
}
```

### InternalSession

Used internally by Serverpod for operations outside client calls.

## Working with sessions

### Logging

Sessions provide structured logging capabilities:

```dart
// Log at different levels
session.log('User action completed', level: LogLevel.info);
session.log('Warning condition', level: LogLevel.warning);

// Log with exceptions
try {
  // operation
} catch (e, stackTrace) {
  session.log('Operation failed', 
    level: LogLevel.error,
    exception: e,
    stackTrace: stackTrace
  );
}
```

### Session lifecycle

Sessions can have listeners for cleanup operations:

```dart

> // Add a listener that runs when session closes

Reviewer 2: Agreed, I think it is important to discuss the life cycle of a session in this doc and explain when different calls happen. Putting these listeners into that context. Also the example of remove listener just sends a random variable into the method without any explanation. Instead explicitly show how you create that variable and then how you use it to remove the listener.

});
```

## Caching

Access different cache levels through the session:

```dart
// Local cache (server-specific)
await session.caches.local.put('key', data, lifetime: Duration(minutes: 5));
var cached = await session.caches.local.get<MyData>('key');

// Priority cache for frequently accessed data
await session.caches.localPrio.put('important-key', data);

// Distributed cache (Redis, across cluster)
await session.caches.global.put('global-key', data);
```

## File storage

Manage cloud storage through the session:

```dart
// Store a file
await session.storage.storeFile(
  storageId: 'public',
  path: 'uploads/image.png',
  byteData: imageData,
);

// Retrieve a file
ByteData? data = await session.storage.retrieveFile(
  storageId: 'public',
  path: 'uploads/image.png',
);

// Get public URL
Uri? url = await session.storage.getPublicUrl(
  storageId: 'public',
  path: 'uploads/image.png',
);
```

## Messaging

Send messages between sessions:

```dart
// Listen for messages
session.messages.addListener('chat', (message) {
  print('Received: $message');
});

// Send a message to local server
await session.messages.postMessage('chat', MyMessage());

> // Send globally across cluster

Reviewer 2: It does yes

1. **HTTP request** → `MethodCallSession` for endpoint method calls
2. **WebSocket stream** → `MethodStreamSession` for streaming endpoints
3. **WebSocket connection** → `StreamingSession` for real-time connections
4. **Scheduled task** → `FutureCallSession` for future calls
5. **Internal operations** → `InternalSession` created by framework or manually via `Serverpod.instance.createSession()`

### Session Created & Initialize

Once Serverpod determines the session type, it creates and initializes the session:

- Generates a unique session ID (`UuidValue`)
- Records the start time
- Sets up the logging system (if enabled in configuration)
- Initializes resource accessors (database, cache, storage, messaging)
- Stores the authentication key (if provided in the request)

Sessions are normally created automatically by the framework. The exception is `InternalSession`, which you create manually for background tasks (see [InternalSession - System operations](#internalsession---system-operations)).

### Execute Endpoint Method

During method execution, the session provides access to all server resources:

> 1. **Authentication** - Validated automatically before execution if endpoint has `requireLogin: true` or `requiredScopes`, otherwise lazy-loaded on first access to `session.authenticated`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Authentication** - Resolved before execution if endpoint has `requireLogin: true` or `requiredScopes`, otherwise lazy-loaded on first access to `session.authenticated`
```

> 2. **Logging** - Log entries accumulate in memory during execution

Reviewer: Discussion: This is only true for non-streaming endpoints. It might be better to document in connection to those?

3. **Database operations** - Queries are counted, timed, and logged
4. **Request context** - Endpoint name, method, and metadata remain accessible

```dart
// Example: Endpoint without requireLogin (uses lazy authentication)
Future<User?> getUser(Session session, int userId) async {
  // Authentication is checked here on first access (lazy loading)
  var authInfo = await session.authenticated;
  if (authInfo == null) {
    throw UnauthorizedException();
  }

  // Logs accumulate in memory
  session.log('Fetching user $userId');

  // Database operations are tracked
  return await User.db.findById(session, userId);
}
```

### Close Session

Sessions close either automatically or manually:

**Automatic closure:**

- Method calls: After the endpoint method returns

> - Streaming: When the WebSocket connection ends

Reviewer: Discussion: There is a difference between streaming endpoints and streaming methods here.

A streaming method will close it's session once the method is complete. A streaming endpoint shares the session between all streams in the websocket and is closed when the websocket is closed.

- Future calls: After the scheduled task completes

**Manual closure:**

- Internal sessions: Must call `session.close()` explicitly

When closing, the session:

1. Becomes unusable (further operations throw `StateError`)

> 2. Executes any cleanup callbacks registered with `addWillCloseListener()`

Reviewer: Note: There is an issue for documenting this that could be closed when we document this: https://github.com/serverpod/serverpod/issues/3419

3. Removes all message channel subscriptions

#### Cleanup callbacks

For custom resources that need cleanup when a session closes:

```dart
Future<void> processWithExternalService(Session session) async {
  var service = await ExternalService.connect();

  // Ensure cleanup even if session closes unexpectedly
  session.addWillCloseListener((session) async {
    await service.disconnect();
  });

  // Use service...
}
```

> ### Write logs to database

Reviewer: Question/Discussion: Shouldnt this be part of the `Logging mechanics` part of the documentation?

The header structure of this page feels a bit cluttered, I think we can provide a bit more guidance and overview to the reader by splitting up the details from a clear overview to start with. To me, how logs are written feels more like a "dig down" detail rather than overview picture.

  // Use service...
}
```

:::
### Write logs to database

> ## Creating sessions

Reviewer: Suggestion: Retain this section to document intenal session and focus on only the automatically created sessions in diagrams and the documentation.

This feels like a deeper detail that might be best explained in it's own section since the user is then responsible for the lifecycle of the section.

> **Exception:** Streaming sessions write logs immediately instead of batching.

Reviewer: Suggestion: This should be part of the normal section.

### Request Complete

Once logs are written, the request lifecycle is complete and all resources are released.

### Invalid session usage

Using a session after it's closed throws a `StateError`:

```dart
Future<void> badExample(Session session) async {
  var data = await fetchData(session);

  // DON'T DO THIS - Session closes when method returns
  Timer(Duration(seconds: 1), () {
    // This will throw: StateError: Session is closed, and logging
    // can no longer be performed.
    session.log('Delayed log'); // ❌ Session already closed!
  });

  return data;
}
```

## Authentication flow

Authentication in sessions works differently based on endpoint configuration:

> ### For endpoints with `requireLogin: true` or `requiredScopes`

Reviewer: Discussion: These headers are not really helpful in providing an overview of the page. Perhaps Authentication should be a subsection to Session lifecycle and that would be enough?

```dart
// ✅ Good - Let Serverpod manage the session
await serverpod.futureCallWithDelay(
  'processPayment',
  PaymentData(orderId: order.id),
  Duration(hours: 1),
);

// ❌ Complex - Manual session management
Future.delayed(Duration(hours: 1), () async {
  var session = await Serverpod.instance.createSession();
  try {
    await processPayment(session, order.id);
  } finally {
    await session.close();
  }
});
```

### 3. Handle errors properly

Always handle exceptions to prevent unclosed sessions:

```dart
// ✅ Good - Errors won't prevent session cleanup
Future<void> safeOperation() async {
  var session = await Serverpod.instance.createSession();
  try {
    await riskyOperation(session);
  } catch (e) {
    session.log('Operation failed: $e', level: LogLevel.error);
    // Handle error appropriately
  } finally {
    await session.close();
  }
}
```

## Quick reference

### Essential properties

- **`db`** - Database access. [See database docs](./06-database/01-connection.md)
- **`caches`** - Local and distributed caching. [See caching docs](./08-caching.md)
- **`storage`** - File storage operations. [See file uploads](./12-file-uploads.md)

> - **`messages`** - Inter-session messaging. [See streams docs](./15-streams.md)

Reviewer: Suggestion: Change to `Server events` see server events section in documentation: https://docs.serverpod.dev/concepts/server-events

- **`passwords`** - Credentials from config and environment. [See configuration](./07-configuration.md)

### Key methods

- **`authenticated`** - Get authentication info (pre-validated for protected endpoints, lazy-loaded for others)

> - **`isUserSignedIn`** - Quick auth check

Reviewer: Discussion: Not sure if this should be promoted?

- **`log(message, level)`** - Add log entry
- **`close(error, stackTrace)`** - Manual session cleanup
- **`addWillCloseListener(callback)`** - Register cleanup callback

### Testing

> Use `TestSessionBuilder` in integration tests. [See testing docs](./19-testing/01-get-started.md)

Reviewer: Suggestion: Explain what the purpose would be to use the test session builder.

What is the purpose of having this section here? Please make it clear why the user might want to use the test session builder and read more details around it.

Common in: User authentication, data fetching, CRUD operations

```dart
Future<String> hello(Session session, String name) async {
  // You're working with a MethodCallSession here
  // It will close automatically after this method returns
  return 'Hello $name';
}
```

### MethodStreamSession - Real-time communication

Created for: `Stream<T>` endpoint methods or stream parameters
Lifetime: Duration of the stream
Common in: Chat applications, live notifications, real-time collaboration

```dart
Stream<Message> chat(Session session, Stream<String> incoming) async* {
  // MethodStreamSession stays open for the stream duration
  await for (var message in incoming) {
    yield Message(text: message, time: DateTime.now());
  }
  // Closes when stream completes
}
```

### FutureCallSession - Background tasks

Created for: Scheduled operations
Lifetime: Task execution duration
Common in: Email sending, report generation, data cleanup

```dart
class EmailSender extends FutureCall {
  @override
  Future<void> invoke(Session session, EmailData? data) async {
    // FutureCallSession created just for this task
    await sendEmail(session, data!);
    // Closes when task completes
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Comment: Not sure about this section. The problem I see is that it is not clear to me what is special about the session in each case, we are just using the normal Session interface. Which I btw think is good, but that kind of makes the value of this text questionable. 

No actionable feedback, I'm not sure what a better alternative is..

Future<List<User>> getActiveUsers(Session session) async {
  var newSession = await Serverpod.instance.createSession();
  try {
    return await User.db.find(newSession, ...);
  } finally {
    await newSession.close();
  }
}
```

### 2. Use FutureCalls for delayed operations

Instead of managing sessions for async work, use Serverpod's future call system:

```dart
// ✅ Good - Let Serverpod manage the session
await serverpod.futureCallWithDelay(
  'processPayment',
  PaymentData(orderId: order.id),
  Duration(hours: 1),
);

// ❌ Complex - Manual session management
Future.delayed(Duration(hours: 1), () async {
  var session = await Serverpod.instance.createSession();
  try {
    await processPayment(session, order.id);
  } finally {
    await session.close();
  }
});
```

### 3. Register cleanup with will-close listeners

For custom resources that need cleanup:

```dart
Future<void> processWithExternalService(Session session) async {
  var service = await ExternalService.connect();

  // Ensure cleanup even if session closes unexpectedly
  session.addWillCloseListener((session) async {
    await service.disconnect();
  });

  // Use service...
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: This should be described in a section around the lifecycle rather than under best practices as this is a core concept not a style preference.
